final version of post (#176)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_tutorials/tutorial-optimal-transport.md

Reviewer: I'd rename this file to include the date of the post (2024-05-13) so that it follows the same naming scheme as the other files.

Author: I missed this remark, thanks

- It is not guaranteed that such optimal transport plan exists
- One might want to relax the constraint that a mine can only provide a unique factory

&nbsp;

**Relaxation of the formulation by Kantorovich**

In the 1940s, Leonid Kantorovich proposed the most significant advances since the original problem formulation by encompassing it in a more general one that has nicer mathematical properties. 

Let us define the transport cost matrix $$M_{XY} = [c(x_i,y_i)]_{ij}$$. The set of all admissible transport plans, also called *couplings* is :

$$
U(\mu,\nu) = \{P \in \mathbb{R}_{+}^{m \times n} \vert P1_m=\mu, P^T 1_n = \nu \}
$$

This is the same kind of transport plan than in the Monge formulation in the sense that it aims to transport distribution mass $$\mu$$ to distribution $$\nu$$, except that it gets rid of the uniqueness in the "mine-to-factory" assignement.

> Note that the Monge formulation is equivalent to requiring the matrices to be permutation matrices

The cost remains similar except that it is now formulated with matrix :

$$
\min_{P \in U(\mu, \nu)} \sum_{i=1, j=1}^{m,n} P(i,j)c(x_i,y_j) = \min_{P \in U(\mu, \nu)} \langle P,M_{XY} \rangle
$$

> where $$\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$$ designates the Frobenius norm.

Author: ```suggestion
where $$\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$$ designates the Frobenius distance.
```

$$
\text{(M)} \qquad \underset{T_{\# \mu} = \nu}{\inf} \int_X c(x,T(x)) \mathrm{d} \mu(x)
$$

$$
\text{(K)} \qquad \underset{\gamma \in \Gamma(\mu, \nu)}{\inf} \int_X c(x,y) \mathrm{d} \gamma(x,y)
$$

where $$T$$ is a transport map from $$X$$ to $$Y$$ and $$\Gamma(\mu, \nu)$$ denotes the collection of all probability measures on $$X \times Y$$ with marginals $$\mu$$ on $$X$$ and $$\nu$$ on $$Y$$ (continuous equivalent of $$U(\mu, \nu)$$ above). 

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/optimal_transport/discrete_semi_continuous.jpg" width=600></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 3. Examples of transort plans in the discrete, semidiscrete and continuous cases.</p>

&nbsp;

### Wasserstein distance and barycenter

For $$p \in [1, +\infty]$$ and $$d(\cdot, \cdot)$$ a distance, the following quantity define a distance between two distributions $$\mu$$ and $$\nu$$ :

$$
W_p(\mu, \nu) = (\underset{\gamma \in \Gamma(\mu, \nu)}{\inf} \int_X d^p(x,y) \mathrm{d} \gamma(x,y))^{\frac{1}{p}}
$$

> Given a set of measure $$\{b_s\}_{s=1,...,S}$$, one way to define the barycenter of these measures is :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given a set of measures $$\{b_s\}_{s=1,...,S}$$, one way to define the barycenter of these measures is :
```

$$
\underset{a}{\min} \sum_{s=1}^{S} \lambda_s W_p^p(a,b_s)
$$

where $$\lambda_1,...,\lambda_S$$ are the weights given to each distribution.

&nbsp;

### **Limits for practical applications**

> Although properties of existence and uniqueness have been demonstrated for optimal transport for the formulation of Kantorovich, as well as equivalence between Monge and Kantorovich's formulation under certain conditions, there remains several major practical limitions for optimal transport to be directly applied in large dimension :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although properties of existence and uniqueness have been demonstrated for optimal transport for the Kantorovich formulation, as well as equivalence between Monge and Kantorovich's formulations under certain conditions, there remains several major practical limitations for optimal transport to be directly applied in high dimensionality:
```

> - If the source and target distributions respectively have respectively $$m$$ and $$n$$ supports points, the solution of optimal transport can be found at best at cost $$O((n+m)nm\log(n+m))$$, which is way to expensive for large datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the source and target distributions have respectively $$m$$ and $$n$$ supports points, the solution of optimal transport can be found at best at cost $$O((n+m)nm\log(n+m))$$, which is way to expensive for large datasets.
```

- The optimal transport plan can be "noisy" or "irregular" with respect to inputs.

> - The optimal solution $$P^*$$ may not be unique and has no meaningful Jacobian with respect to inputs $$X$$ or $$Y$$, as illustrated if Figure 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The optimal solution $$P^*$$ may not be unique and has no meaningful Jacobian with respect to inputs $$X$$ or $$Y$$, as illustrated in Figure 4.
```

> - The optimal transport plan is bound to the points that are given when its computed. One important question is what happens when a new point is given.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The optimal transport plan is bound to the points that are given when it is computed. One important unanswered question is what happens when a new point is given.
```

> -  One may want to compute an optimal transport between distributions that don't live in the same space or that different mass (non equal to 1). It that possible and how to do it ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  One may want to compute an optimal transport between distributions that don't live in the same space or that have different masses (non equal to 1). Is that possible and how to do it?
```

-  The computation of Wasserstein distance suffers from the curse of dimensionality.

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/optimal_transport/non_differentiable.jpg" width=400></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 4. Illustration of a limitation of optimal transport for modern applications.</p>

> All these questions are crucial for optimal transport to be applied for large dataset and in deep learning. It is because they have found satisfying answers that optimal transport is now applied for few years in these domains. The next section aims to present some solutions to the problems listed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these questions are crucial for optimal transport to be applied to large datasets and deep learning. It is because satisfying answers have been found that optimal transport has now been in use for a few years in these domains. The next section aims to present some solutions to the problems listed above.
```
